docs/essentials/element_attributes.md, before:

# Supported Element attributes

The core building block of a Blits template is the `<Element>`-tag. The Element tag corresponds directly to a node in the Lightning 3 Renderer. You can style and position Elements via _attributes_, much like you would do in plain HTML.

Blits Elements have a specific set of attributes that can be used. The available attributes are loosely modeled after the properties of a Lightning 3 renderer node. In certain cases, Blits provides more developer friendly names or accepts a wider range of values, and transparently takes care of the translation into L3 renderer instructions.

## Positioning and Dimensions

In order to position and set the dimensions of an Element, the following attributes can be used.

  - `x` - the x position of the Element in pixels, relative to its parent - allows negative values and decimals
  - `y` - the y position of the Element in pixels, relative to its parent - allows negative values and decimals
  - `z` - the z index of the element (optionally `zIndex` can be used as an alias)
  - `w` - the width of the element in pixels (optionally `width` can be used as an alias)
  - `h` - the height of the element in pixels (optionally `height` can be used as an alias)

All positioning and dimension related attributes, when not specified, will default to `0`.

```xml
<Element x="100" y="100" w="800" h="400">
  <Element x="40" y="80" w="300" h="300" z="10" />
  <Element x="60" y="120" w="200" h="200" z="0" />
</Element>
```

### Using percentages

Besides using values in pixels (i.e. `w="100" h="300"`), you can also specify _percentages_ for the positioning and dimensions attributes.

```xml
<Element w="400" h="100" x="800" y="900" color="#0284c7">
  <Element w="42%" h="30%" y="5%" x="1%" color="#075985" />
</Element>
```

The percentage value specified for `w` and `x` will be calculated as the percentage of the _width_ (`w`) of the parent element.
And the percentage specified for `h` and `y` will use the _height_ (`h`) of the parent element as the base of the percentage calculation.

### Predefined placement options

In addition to the absolute positions that Blits and Lightning use, there are a few predefined placement options available. By adding the `placement`-attribute to an Element we can easily align it to the _center_, _left_, _right_, _top_, _bottom_, or even a combination like `{y: 'middle', x: 'left'}`, without having to calculate the positions yourself.


On the `x`-axis the following _placement_ options can be used: `left` (default), `center` and `right`. On the `y`-axis the _placement_ attribute accepts `top` (default), `middle` and `bottom`.

The _placement_ attribute also accepts an object with an `x` and a `y` key, to specify a placement for both axes.

The placement of an Element is calculated based on the dimensions of its direct parent. This means that the containing Element _must_ have its own dimensions (i.e. a `w` and a `h` attribute).

```xml
<Element w="300" h="300">
  <!-- x placement -->
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="left" color="#818cf8" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="center" color="#2563eb" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="right" color="#1e40af" />

  <!-- y placement -->
  <Element w="40" h="40" x="54" placement="top" color="#f472b6" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" x="54" placement="middle" color="#db2777" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" x="54" placement="bottom" color="#be185d" />

  <!-- x/y placement -->
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="{x: 'center', y: 'bottom'}" color="#a3e635" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="{x: 'right', y: 'middle'}" color="#65a30d" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="{x: 'center', y: 'middle'}" color="#4d7c0f" />
</Element>
```

> note: the `x` or `y` attributes on the Element are ignored for those axes defined in the `placement`-attribute

## Colors

By default, Elements have a transparent background color. The `color` attribute can be used to give an Element a color.

If you are familiar with Lightning 2: colors have gotten a lot easier with Blits. Under the hood, the Lightning 3 renderer still uses the somewhat unfamiliar (but efficient) `0xffc0ffee` syntax. In Blits, you can specify colors as you are used to in HTML and CSS.

Blits accepts the following color formats and makes sure that they are converted in a way the Lightning 3 renderer can understand.

- hexadecimal (i.e. `#ff4433`)
- hexadecimal with an alpha channel (i.e `#55553380`)
- hexadecimal shorthands (i.e. `#333`)
- rgb (i.e. `rgb(180, 30, 50)`)
- rgba (i.e `rgba(40, 30, 180, 0.5)`)
- html color names (i.e. `red`, `blue`, `skyblue`, `tomato`)

_HSL and HSLA formats are planned to be added in the future._

```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" color="#ff4433" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="#55553380" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="#333" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="rgb(180, 30, 50)" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="rgba(40, 30, 180, 0.5)" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="black" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="red" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="skyblue" />
```

### Basic linear gradients

The color attribute can also be used to specify basic linear gradients.

A linear gradient can be defined by specifying an _object literal_ as the `color` attribute instead of a single color. The object can consist of a mix of `top`, `bottom`, `left`, `right` keys, with the color to use for that side as a value. If a specific side isn't specified, it defaults to `transparent`.

Again, you can use "normal" notation for the colors (like hexadecimal or rgba) and you are free to mix and match formats.

```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" color="{top: 'red', bottom: 'blue'}" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="{left: 'rgba(255,255,255,.5)', right: '#000'}" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="{left: '#aaa333', top: 'aqua', 'bottom: rgb(255,100,20)'}" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="{bottom: 'black'}" />
```

## Alpha and visibility

The opacity of an Element can be controlled by setting the `alpha` attribute. This attribute accepts a value between `0` (fully transparent) and `1` (completely visible).

The value of alpha is also applied recursively to the children of the Element that has its alpha set. If you just want the background color of an Element to be semi-transparent, you should set the alpha channel in the `color` instead of applying the `alpha` attribute.

```xml
  <Element w="200" h="200" color="blue" alpha="0.8">
    <Element w="100" h="100" color="red" alpha="0.3" />
  </Element>
```

## Rotation and scaling

If you want to rotate an Element, you can use the `rotation` attribute. The rotation attribute in Blits accepts values in _degrees_.

The rotation of an Element is also automatically applied to any children down the tree.

```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" color="blue" rotation="90">
  <Element w="100" h="100" color="red" rotation="240" />
</Element>
```

For scaling an Element the `scale` attribute is used.

This attribute either accepts a single numeric value for scaling evenly across width and height. Or an _object literal_, if you want to apply a different scaling for the `x` and the `y` axis.

The value should be higher than `0` and the default value is `1`, which means no scaling.

Any value below `1` will scale _down_ the element and values greater than `1` will scale the element _up_.

Similar to rotation, scale is also applied recursively to children down the tree of the Element that has its `scale` attribute set.

```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" color="blue" scale="0.5" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="#000" scale="2.3" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="#000" scale="{x: 1, y: 3.14}" />
```

## Mounting point

For advanced positioning, the `mount` attribute can come in handy. By default when you set the `x` and `y` position of an Element, the _top-left_ corner will be set to that position. But in some cases, you may want to align the position starting at a different corner, or even any arbitrary point in between.

The `mount` attribute accepts an _object literal_ that allows you to precisely control the mount position on the _x-axis_ and the mount position on the _y-axis_. The default value is `{x: 0, y: 0}`, which refers to the _top-left_ corner.

In order to align the position starting at the _bottom-right_ corner, we would set `mount` to `{x: 1, y: 1}` and `{x: 0.5, y: 0.5}` would align the position at the _center_ of the Element.

If you omit either the `x` or the `y` key from the _object literal_, its value will default to `0`.

In the case where the `x` and `y` values are the same (i.e. centering with `{x: 0.5, y: 0.5}`), you can also just supply a single value (`mount="0.5"`) instead of the object literal notation.

```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" x="20" y="100" color="#333" mount="{x: 0.5, y: 0.8}" />
<Element w="200" h="200" x="800" y="400" color="#333" mount="{y: 1}" />
<Element w="200" h="200" x="800" y="700" color="#333" mount="0.5" />
```

## Pivot point

The pivot point of an Element comes into play when it's rotated or scaled. The pivot point defaults to the _center_ of the Element, which means that when setting `rotation` it rotates around the middle. And when the Element is scaled it scales from the center out.

But sometimes you may want to rotate around the left corner, or scale from the right side out. This can be controlled by adding the `pivot` attribute to the Element and, similar to the `mount` attribute, specify an _object literal_ with an `x` and a `y` key.

Both `y` and `x` values should be anything between `0` and `1`, where `{x: 0, y: 0}` sets the pivot point to the _top-left_ corner and `{x: 1, y: 1}` refers to the _bottom-right_ corner. The default pivot value is `{x: 0.5, y: 0.5}` (i.e. the center) and if you omit `x` or `y` in your pivot object, it will default to `0.5`.

In the case where the `x` and `y` values are the same, you can also just supply a single value (`pivot="0.9"`) instead of the object literal notation.


```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" x="20" y="100" pivot="{x: 0.5, y: 0.8}" rotation="69" />
<Element w="200" h="200" x="800" y="400" pivot="{y: 1}" scale="3" />
<Element w="200" h="200" x="800" y="700" pivot="0.9" rotation="42" />
```

## Clipping / overflow

By default contents inside an Element (i.e. child Elements) will overflow the boundaries of the parent, even when you give the parent Element fixed dimensions.

In order to contain / cut off the content inside an Element's `w` and `h`, you can add the `clipping="true"`-attribute. Setting `clipping` to `false` restores the default behaviour of content overflowing.

Alternatively you can also use the `overflow`-attribute (and pass it `true` or `false`), which works similar to clipping just mapped inversly (i.e. `overflow="false"` ensures content that surpasses the parent dimensions is clipped-off).

## Inspector Data

The `inspector-data` attribute allows you to attach custom metadata to elements and components for debugging and automated testing. This data is visible in the Lightning inspector tool when enabled.

```xml
<Element inspector-data="{testId: 'button-primary', role: 'navigation'}" />
<Button inspector-data="{testId: 'submit-button', role: 'action'}" />
```

The framework automatically provides the following inspector metadata keys for **Components only** (prefixed with `$` to prevent naming collisions):
- `$componentType` - The component name (e.g., 'MyComponent', 'Button', etc.)
- `$hasFocus` - Whether the component currently has focus (automatically updates on focus/unfocus events)
- `$isTransitioning` - Whether the element is currently animating/transitioning (automatically updates)

> **Note:** 
> - The `inspector-data` attribute is only processed in development mode when the inspector is enabled. It's automatically filtered out in production builds for performance.
> - Automatic framework metadata (`$componentType`, `$hasFocus`, `$isTransitioning`) is only set for Components, to keep the render path lightweight.

Commit message:

feat: inspector metadata keys use blits-* prefix

docs/essentials/element_attributes.md, after:

# Supported Element attributes

The core building block of a Blits template is the `<Element>`-tag. The Element tag corresponds directly to a node in the Lightning 3 Renderer. You can style and position Elements via _attributes_, much like you would do in plain HTML.

Blits Elements have a specific set of attributes that can be used. The available attributes are loosely modeled after the properties of a Lightning 3 renderer node. In certain cases, Blits provides more developer friendly names or accepts a wider range of values, and transparently takes care of the translation into L3 renderer instructions.

## Positioning and Dimensions

In order to position and set the dimensions of an Element, the following attributes can be used.

  - `x` - the x position of the Element in pixels, relative to its parent - allows negative values and decimals
  - `y` - the y position of the Element in pixels, relative to its parent - allows negative values and decimals
  - `z` - the z index of the element (optionally `zIndex` can be used as an alias)
  - `w` - the width of the element in pixels (optionally `width` can be used as an alias)
  - `h` - the height of the element in pixels (optionally `height` can be used as an alias)

All positioning and dimension related attributes, when not specified, will default to `0`.

```xml
<Element x="100" y="100" w="800" h="400">
  <Element x="40" y="80" w="300" h="300" z="10" />
  <Element x="60" y="120" w="200" h="200" z="0" />
</Element>
```

### Using percentages

Besides using values in pixels (i.e. `w="100" h="300"`), you can also specify _percentages_ for the positioning and dimensions attributes.

```xml
<Element w="400" h="100" x="800" y="900" color="#0284c7">
  <Element w="42%" h="30%" y="5%" x="1%" color="#075985" />
</Element>
```

The percentage value specified for `w` and `x` will be calculated as the percentage of the _width_ (`w`) of the parent element.
And the percentage specified for `h` and `y` will use the _height_ (`h`) of the parent element as the base of the percentage calculation.

### Predefined placement options

In addition to the absolute positions that Blits and Lightning use, there are a few predefined placement options available. By adding the `placement`-attribute to an Element we can easily align it to the _center_, _left_, _right_, _top_, _bottom_, or even a combination like `{y: 'middle', x: 'left'}`, without having to calculate the positions yourself.


On the `x`-axis the following _placement_ options can be used: `left` (default), `center` and `right`. On the `y`-axis the _placement_ attribute accepts `top` (default), `middle` and `bottom`.

The _placement_ attribute also accepts an object with an `x` and a `y` key, to specify a placement for both axes.

The placement of an Element is calculated based on the dimensions of its direct parent. This means that the containing Element _must_ have its own dimensions (i.e. a `w` and a `h` attribute).

```xml
<Element w="300" h="300">
  <!-- x placement -->
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="left" color="#818cf8" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="center" color="#2563eb" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="right" color="#1e40af" />

  <!-- y placement -->
  <Element w="40" h="40" x="54" placement="top" color="#f472b6" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" x="54" placement="middle" color="#db2777" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" x="54" placement="bottom" color="#be185d" />

  <!-- x/y placement -->
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="{x: 'center', y: 'bottom'}" color="#a3e635" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="{x: 'right', y: 'middle'}" color="#65a30d" />
  <Element w="40" h="40" placement="{x: 'center', y: 'middle'}" color="#4d7c0f" />
</Element>
```

> note: the `x` or `y` attributes on the Element are ignored for those axes defined in the `placement`-attribute

## Colors

By default, Elements have a transparent background color. The `color` attribute can be used to give an Element a color.

If you are familiar with Lightning 2: colors have gotten a lot easier with Blits. Under the hood, the Lightning 3 renderer still uses the somewhat unfamiliar (but efficient) `0xffc0ffee` syntax. In Blits, you can specify colors as you are used to in HTML and CSS.

Blits accepts the following color formats and makes sure that they are converted in a way the Lightning 3 renderer can understand.

- hexadecimal (i.e. `#ff4433`)
- hexadecimal with an alpha channel (i.e `#55553380`)
- hexadecimal shorthands (i.e. `#333`)
- rgb (i.e. `rgb(180, 30, 50)`)
- rgba (i.e `rgba(40, 30, 180, 0.5)`)
- html color names (i.e. `red`, `blue`, `skyblue`, `tomato`)

_HSL and HSLA formats are planned to be added in the future._

```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" color="#ff4433" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="#55553380" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="#333" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="rgb(180, 30, 50)" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="rgba(40, 30, 180, 0.5)" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="black" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="red" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="skyblue" />
```

### Basic linear gradients

The color attribute can also be used to specify basic linear gradients.

A linear gradient can be defined by specifying an _object literal_ as the `color` attribute instead of a single color. The object can consist of a mix of `top`, `bottom`, `left`, `right` keys, with the color to use for that side as a value. If a specific side isn't specified, it defaults to `transparent`.

Again, you can use "normal" notation for the colors (like hexadecimal or rgba) and you are free to mix and match formats.

```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" color="{top: 'red', bottom: 'blue'}" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="{left: 'rgba(255,255,255,.5)', right: '#000'}" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="{left: '#aaa333', top: 'aqua', 'bottom: rgb(255,100,20)'}" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="{bottom: 'black'}" />
```

## Alpha and visibility

The opacity of an Element can be controlled by setting the `alpha` attribute. This attribute accepts a value between `0` (fully transparent) and `1` (completely visible).

The value of alpha is also applied recursively to the children of the Element that has its alpha set. If you just want the background color of an Element to be semi-transparent, you should set the alpha channel in the `color` instead of applying the `alpha` attribute.

```xml
  <Element w="200" h="200" color="blue" alpha="0.8">
    <Element w="100" h="100" color="red" alpha="0.3" />
  </Element>
```

## Rotation and scaling

If you want to rotate an Element, you can use the `rotation` attribute. The rotation attribute in Blits accepts values in _degrees_.

The rotation of an Element is also automatically applied to any children down the tree.

```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" color="blue" rotation="90">
  <Element w="100" h="100" color="red" rotation="240" />
</Element>
```

For scaling an Element the `scale` attribute is used.

This attribute either accepts a single numeric value for scaling evenly across width and height. Or an _object literal_, if you want to apply a different scaling for the `x` and the `y` axis.

The value should be higher than `0` and the default value is `1`, which means no scaling.

Any value below `1` will scale _down_ the element and values greater than `1` will scale the element _up_.

Similar to rotation, scale is also applied recursively to children down the tree of the Element that has its `scale` attribute set.

```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" color="blue" scale="0.5" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="#000" scale="2.3" />
<Element w="200" h="200" color="#000" scale="{x: 1, y: 3.14}" />
```

## Mounting point

For advanced positioning, the `mount` attribute can come in handy. By default when you set the `x` and `y` position of an Element, the _top-left_ corner will be set to that position. But in some cases, you may want to align the position starting at a different corner, or even any arbitrary point in between.

The `mount` attribute accepts an _object literal_ that allows you to precisely control the mount position on the _x-axis_ and the mount position on the _y-axis_. The default value is `{x: 0, y: 0}`, which refers to the _top-left_ corner.

In order to align the position starting at the _bottom-right_ corner, we would set `mount` to `{x: 1, y: 1}` and `{x: 0.5, y: 0.5}` would align the position at the _center_ of the Element.

If you omit either the `x` or the `y` key from the _object literal_, its value will default to `0`.

In the case where the `x` and `y` values are the same (i.e. centering with `{x: 0.5, y: 0.5}`), you can also just supply a single value (`mount="0.5"`) instead of the object literal notation.

```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" x="20" y="100" color="#333" mount="{x: 0.5, y: 0.8}" />
<Element w="200" h="200" x="800" y="400" color="#333" mount="{y: 1}" />
<Element w="200" h="200" x="800" y="700" color="#333" mount="0.5" />
```

## Pivot point

The pivot point of an Element comes into play when it's rotated or scaled. The pivot point defaults to the _center_ of the Element, which means that when setting `rotation` it rotates around the middle. And when the Element is scaled it scales from the center out.

But sometimes you may want to rotate around the left corner, or scale from the right side out. This can be controlled by adding the `pivot` attribute to the Element and, similar to the `mount` attribute, specify an _object literal_ with an `x` and a `y` key.

Both `y` and `x` values should be anything between `0` and `1`, where `{x: 0, y: 0}` sets the pivot point to the _top-left_ corner and `{x: 1, y: 1}` refers to the _bottom-right_ corner. The default pivot value is `{x: 0.5, y: 0.5}` (i.e. the center) and if you omit `x` or `y` in your pivot object, it will default to `0.5`.

In the case where the `x` and `y` values are the same, you can also just supply a single value (`pivot="0.9"`) instead of the object literal notation.


```xml
<Element w="200" h="200" x="20" y="100" pivot="{x: 0.5, y: 0.8}" rotation="69" />
<Element w="200" h="200" x="800" y="400" pivot="{y: 1}" scale="3" />
<Element w="200" h="200" x="800" y="700" pivot="0.9" rotation="42" />
```

## Clipping / overflow

By default contents inside an Element (i.e. child Elements) will overflow the boundaries of the parent, even when you give the parent Element fixed dimensions.

In order to contain / cut off the content inside an Element's `w` and `h`, you can add the `clipping="true"`-attribute. Setting `clipping` to `false` restores the default behaviour of content overflowing.

Alternatively you can also use the `overflow`-attribute (and pass it `true` or `false`), which works similar to clipping just mapped inversly (i.e. `overflow="false"` ensures content that surpasses the parent dimensions is clipped-off).

## Inspector Data

The `inspector-data` attribute allows you to attach custom metadata to elements and components for debugging and automated testing. This data is visible in the Lightning inspector tool when enabled.

```xml
<Element inspector-data="{testId: 'button-primary', role: 'navigation'}" />
<Button inspector-data="{testId: 'submit-button', role: 'action'}" />
```

The framework automatically provides the following inspector metadata keys for **Components only** (prefixed with `blits-`):
- `blits-componentType` – The component name (e.g. 'MyComponent', 'Button'). Exposed as `data-blits-componenttype`.
- `blits-hasFocus` – Whether the component currently has focus (updates on focus/unfocus). Exposed as `data-blits-hasfocus`.
- `blits-isTransitioning` – Whether the element is currently animating/transitioning. Exposed as `data-blits-istransitioning`.

> **Note:** 
> - The `inspector-data` attribute is only processed in development mode when the inspector is enabled. It's automatically filtered out in production builds for performance.
> - Automatic framework metadata (`blits-componentType`, `blits-hasFocus`, `blits-isTransitioning`) is only set for Components, to keep the render path lightweight.
